Bhagavatam Lecture: Water and Krishna - Transcript


**Speaker 0:**
One second, please.
Madura.
Sweet. Tikta. Bitter. Katu. Pungent. Amalah.
Sour. Iti. Thus. Na ekadha. Manifoldly. Bhautikanam. Of other substances. Vikarena. By transformation. Rasah. The subtle element, taste. Ekah. Originally one. Vibhityate. Is divided.
Although originally one, taste becomes manifold as astringent, sweet, bitter, pungent, sour, and salty due to contact with other substances. Text forty-three.
Call and response.
Tvima. The characteristics of water are exhibited by its moistening other substances, coagulating various mixtures Opening things, driving away heat, incessantly supplying itself to reservoirs of water and refreshing by slaking thirst.
Purport: Starvation can be mitigated by drinking water. It is sometimes found that if a person who has taken a vow to fast takes a little intervals at-- takes a little water at intervals, the exhaustion of fasting is at once mitigated. In the Vedas, it is also stated, "Apo maya prana. " Life depends on water. With water, anything can be moistened or dampened. Flour dough can be prepared with a mixture of water. Mud is made by mixing earth with water. As stated in the beginning of Srimad Bhagavatam, water is the cementing ingredient of different material elements. If we build a house, water is actually the constituent in making the bricks. Fire, water, and air are the exchanging elements for the entire material manifestation, but water is most prominent. Also, excessive heat can be reduced simply by pouring water on the heated field.
So,
Marosh, do you have any comments at this time?
Okay.
so here we heard about two, two other elements. We're hearing this chapter, The Fundamental Principles of Material Nature. So these are the building blocks of the creation which we find ourselves in now. And, uh, Devahuti, uh, thought it wise to understand clearly about this, um, and also, uh, Kapiladeva, her son, also thought it wise to describe it. And one can say, "Well, what is this? This doesn't have anything to do with Krishna.
Right? But actually, this is how everything is being connected with Krishna. That's actually the, purpose of the Shastras, is Krishna is giving that blessing to us through the Bhagavatam and through the Gita to connect everything to himself, because actually everything is connected to himself, right? If he's the source of everything, then there's nothing that exists which is not connected with himself,
Just like if everything we use is made in China,
Every single thing. China is everywhere, actually, in America also.
So there's an idea. So e-we're connected, right? Now, we're not gonna get into that too much, but the idea is that connection is there because the product is intrinsically actually one and different with the source. The product is connected with the source. So when we hear about water, when we hear about taste, when we hear about the different flavors on the tongue, which are produced by, uh, the different material elements contacting with the saliva, with the moisture on the tongue, then, uh, we can actually see how everything is connected with Krishna when great sages and personalities like Kapiladeva or Krishna himself connect it to himself. So right now, it seems like maybe we're in the weeds, and we're just talking about Maya.
Somebody may say like, "Well, you guys aren't even talking about God.
And we also, as neophyte devotees, we may hear some devotees speak, right? And we may, uh, uh, criticize, "Oh, they're actually in Maya. They're talking about something different. They're talking about maintenance. They're talking about renovations. They're talking about measurements. " Right? Or they're talking about gas prices, or they're talking about this and that. But this is actually our duty. Our duty is to connect everything that we hear to Krishna. That's my duty. Nobody can do that for me. I have to remember. And how can I remember that everything is connected with Krishna? How can I remember
Krishna in spite of hearing so many things which have been, uh. I have never as or hardly ever associated with Krishna, right? I have to hear sufficiently,
I have to hear sufficiently, then I can remember when I live in this world and I experience different things, I can remember the connection to Krishna. Raso'ham apsu kandaraha. That's famous. And Prabhupada gave many lectures where he describes, "This is the beginning. " You have to drink water so many times throughout the day, don't you? And you know the taste of it. You can't eat a pakora and get the same satisfaction you get from drinking water when you need to drink water. And how do you know that it's water? The taste. And actually, Ayurvedic science is based on, uh, partly is based on this taste. The tastes have to be pre-present. That's why the spicing is actually very particular, right? That's why the, ingredients are actually very particular, right? If we mix things which are do not go, then the taste is actually disturbed. Then that taste which is meant to stimulate a certain secretions and certain systems in the body, it's not agitated, it's not, stimulated.
So all these things are a great science, but the main thing is whose, whose world is it? Whose design is it? It's Krishna's design. And I w-was speaking with a devotee yesterday, and, uh, we were discussing, and,
um, many, many people are mad with God.
And if you, dear devotees, also introspect, we may see in our own heart, I'm also mad at Him.
I'm upset with Him. I'm frustrated with Him. I'm actually disappointed in His behavior, His choices. What does that mean? That means I don't accept that He is the autocrat. I've been talking about this openly. Bhaktisiddhanta Prabhupada says, "Krishna is the transcendental autocrat.
Amazing. What is an autocrat? Like, you know, there's a, you know, this, um, democracy, right? And there's autocracy or oligarchy, like these different concepts for, for management or government, right? But the autocrat is the one, whatever he says, whatever he wants is the reality.
That means-- I, I mentioned this before. Satya sankalpa is whatever Krishna wants, it immediately becomes the fact.
None of us have that potency. Nobody else but Him. And there's also another verse from the Chait-- Chaitanya Charitamrita that, uh, eka ish-- ekale ishvara Krishna.
I think it is sarva bhrita. Basically, everybody else is Krishna's servant, and He is the supreme controller. And Brahma also says, "Ishvara parama Krishna. " And in the Srimad Bhagavatam, Vyasadeva actually declares Krishna is tu bhagavan svayam.
So He is the autocrat. He is the autocrat. Whatever He wants is a fact. But, uh, I still have this tamasic tendency, which is that
in spite of not being a, a controller in the slightest, Krishna may give some minute control. I can move my arm. You can't move my arm. Of course, you could move my arm. But generally, I move this body. That's. And I move my mind if my intelligence has been strengthened. If my intelligence hasn't been strengthened, I can't even move my own mind.
You see how, how dependent we are? How not the controller, how much we are not the controller. My own mind is giving me trouble. My own elbow, my own blood flow, my own airflow are-- is disturbing me inside of this body. I'm not in a nice state of well-being. You know, how is that? I'm being subjected to that. What to speak of the sunshine, the weather, anybody-- whatever anybody else does or says to me, whatever that happens in the news or the politics or the world economy and all these things. And still, we have the audacity, you know, to claim that I'm in control. I'm in control of my life. I'm the doer. Karta ham iti manyate. It's silly. So I was speaking with this devotee yesterday, and I was talking about this anger that we feel. It's a very, very deep-seated, uh. It's very profound. So it's very profound, uh, sentiment of the conditioned souls that we're actually angry at Krishna. We're actually envious of Krishna. And that anger for his supreme position, for his autocracy, actually manifests in all of our relationships.
And it manifests primarily, the, the, tagline is sense gratification.
Now, sense gratification is very, very tricky because one can say, "No, uh, I'm not angry with Bhakta Javier. We get along just fine. We're great pals. " Right? But what is happening? What happens if he crosses me in front of other people? What happens if he stops to satisfy my senses? What if he stops speaking to me in the way which I perceive I should be spoken to?
What if he does things which I think shouldn't be done?
So then as soon as some-- as soon as there's this change, what does that change mean? My senses are not being gratified by his person and his behavior, right? So then all of a sudden, my so-called friendship, thrown out the window.
This means mano rataena. This is the platform of the mind, right? And what is the mind doing? We heard earlier in this chapter, the mind is accepting and rejecting. Accepting and rejecting. The same thing which it accepted, it may reject later.
Yeah.
No, mano rataena means the chariot of the mind. Just like ratha, ratha yatra. Ratha, mano, mind chariot. So the mind chariot can.
You know, it runs like a hurricane.
So it's, it's not to be trusted. Actually, the mind is not to be trusted. So what is the idea? The idea is we have to always remember Krishna. Because what?
Prabhuji is not the controller either. Say my-- his actions are disturbing me like anything. They're not. But say, or there's a bug. I think, "What is he doing? Who does he think he is? " Right?
There's a cat. Now I think it's my duty to punish him, you know? For instance. Or anything like this, right? Or especially within the devotee association, we want to get to the root of it. It's stated in the eleventh canto that by gathering together and glorifying the Lord, we are purified. The greatest possible process is to be together and glorify the Lord. That's called the sankirtan yajna. It's the most purifying process. So we have to see what is in the way of me really glorifying Krishna with the devotees. You see? We, it-- What are we doing? We're glorifying Krishna, and that's individual. We all have our love for Krishna, which is dormant, and we all have our appreciation for Krishna, which is blooming. So whatever little appreciation that we have for Krishna, we bring it to the kirtan of the devotees. We bring it. We don't have to be a different person. We be, "I like this about Krishna, and this is attracting my mind about Krishna today. " Come and glorify Krishna with that, you know? But what is in the way? In the way is envy, right? In the way is envy. So here's the thing. Prabhu's actions are not only under his control. He's not autonomous, just like I'm not autonomous.
You know? Krishna is in his heart too. Krishna is in every one of our hearts. Krishna is the one who's the controller and the permitter.
He's permitting certain devotees to act in certain ways. He's permitting them to say certain things. He designed everything about them, and he is actively controlling everything about everyone, either directly or indirectly. But especially for the devotees and those who are on the path of pure devotion, then he takes a personal role.
So what is it? It's amazing. All of this knowledge is meant to help us. That actually, what is it? Envy can be defeated by three things. Then we understand. Bhoktaaram yajna-tapasam. Krishna is the enjoyer of all sacrifices. He is the enjoyer. Then, sarva-loka-mahesvaram. He's the supreme controller, not anyone else. And suhridam sarva-bhutanam. He's the best friend of everyone.
And if we just remember Krishna. So the idea is we hear about Krishna all the time, and we always try to remind each other about Krishna as much as possible. That's all. That's, that's what we get to do together. When you go into the material world, they don't give you the great opportunity for reminding them about Krishna. Neither they are helping you remember Krishna, isn't it? Similarly, nobody can say anything to you which doesn't remind you of Krishna. You cannot see anything on the street which does not remind you of Krishna. What an amazing consciousness. What an amazing process.
So that's the idea is to continually hear and hear all these descriptions, even about the material world, right, which is temporary, right? But then we can remember, oh, this is what Kapiladeva explained to Devahuti, that the tongue has the taste. It's always moistened with saliva, the tongue. And if it's a dry tongue, you may have seen some TV show, there may be some person and he has a very dry tongue and he cannot taste anything. He's dying. He's getting too dry,
So he needs some water. You know, similarly, we need water. What is that water we need? This was actually what was being spoken about this morning in the Lila Amrita. Prabhupada was hardly even drinking. He was hardly even eating anything. But what was he drinking? He was drinking the kirtan of his book distribution reports. He was drinking the kirtan of the devotees chanting for their spiritual master,
And he was sustained by that.
So we also have to sustain that. Our real life force is actually sustained by kirtan.
This silly body is sustained by water, as we heard. By water and by food, right?
But our real body, there's this
phrase that Bhaktisanta Prabhupada would talk about. And he said, every time you approach somebody and you say, my dear sir, you look very intelligent.
Would you be interested in taking this literature?
As soon as you approach somebody with the idea to distribute them transcendental knowledge from the Parampara, you get spiritual blood for your spiritual body.
All of us have a spiritual body, right? But right now it's dormant. And you could say that it needs to be energized sufficiently, right? So what is that energization? Sankirtan. We do it together, right?
We have our personal practice of naam japa, study, svadhyaya. We study, right? We do service.
And then we do sankirtan. We do that kirtan together. We glorify Bhagavatam. We glorify Krishna's holy names. We praise Gaur Nitai together as a team. And we can do a lot more as a team than we can do alone. That's a fact,
It's way better as a team. And there's purification there. There's sweetness there that develops, right? In association. And then what is? We go out and we give the opportunity for others to join the kirtan of Krishna's holy name. And this process is the most divine process and gift of Sri Sri Gaur Nitai. They say, rara krishna bolo bolo bolore sorai shikha diya shob nadiya pir chineche gaur nitai They're preaching in Nadiya. What lessons? Shob nadiya in Nadiya. What? Pir chineche gaur nitai rara krishna bolo Chant Krishna's holy names.
So our tongues, we pray,
will exclusively taste Krishna's prasadam for the rest of our lives. You know, that's our prayer. Because I don't want to be bound by any karma. And I only want to taste that which he's enjoyed first. And our prayer is also to always let these tongues to glorify his holy names and his transcendental science. And to always encourage others to remember Krishna. That's what we want to use the tongue for. So thank you for tolerating me.
Hare Krishna.

**Bhakta Javier:**
Can you put the camera so
Thank you for your Srimad Bhagavatam lecture. You were saying that whatever Krishna desires, that becomes a fact. I could think of at least one desire that Krishna has that's not being fulfilled. Krishna wants the conditioned souls to love him, to always think of him. But because the conditioned souls are rebellious, they have their independence. So Krishna considers their desires also.
And the residents of Vaikuntha Their unhappiness is knowing that the conditioned souls are suffering in the m-material world. Even though they're full of bliss, still they have a, an, um, um, unhappiness knowing that others are, are suffering.

**Speaker 0:**
Thank you so much, Prabhu, for, for adding that perspective. Krishna is so personal, he's so kind that he'll even,
you know, take our desires into consideration, even though they're so silly and destructive and disturbing to everybody, you know.
So this is actually the consciousness of Prahlada Maharaj that, you know, we have to work really hard. We gotta work really, hard to make plans, right? What are those plans? Those plans are up to Krishna, right? But we make the plans. That's up to me. That's my free will, is I'm gonna decide where to put my energy and my attention. So if we make plans to preach Krishna's glories and spread Krishna's name, prasadam, you know, give access to the deity, you know, give access to the Bhagavatam, then
we hope, we pray that Krishna will fulfill our desires, right? There's all those living entities that wanna be away from Krishna, and he's letting them be away from Krishna. And if all the devotees try really, hard to become purified by association with Krishna, then that real desire in our hearts will awaken, that we want others to serve Krishna and associate with Krishna too.
So therefore is the internal practice or the personal practice, and then it, synergizes with compassion. And when we hear about the compassionate, uh, acharyas like Lord Jesus Christ, Prahlada Maharaj, Vasudeva Datta, Srila Prabhupada, there's no way we can, uh. One of our mentors, he stated, "We should be, rolling in our bed at night suffering that he doesn't have a Gita in his house.
That they don't have this opportunity.
What a consciousness. What, what a level of consciousness. So we pray and we can practice in such a way that Krishna is pleased to purify our hearts.
Because for such a person, there's no suffering.
There is no suffering, except,
except that, that people are not getting the chance to serve Krishna.
So thank you very much devotees. Srimad Bhagavatam ki jay. Srila Prabhupada ki jay. All glory to the devotees.